Later, Patrica Uris told her mother that she should have known something was wrong because Stanley never took baths in the early evening. He either showered In the morning or soaked very late at night, usually with a cold can of Schlitz near at hand, always with a book. In the months before that terrible night he had discovered that a childhood friend, Willam Denbrough (whom Stanley sometimes called "Stuttering BlI|"), had turned out to be a writer, and he had worked his way through almost all of Denbrough's books.
He had been reading the last on the terrible night of the bath, which happened to be May 27th, 1983. Patty Urls had picked up one of them out of curlosity and had put it down after just three chapters.
"It was a horrorbook," she told her mother later. "Full of monsters and killings and...I don't know, the vlolence...It seemed almost pornographic to me. But Stan felt as If he'd rediscovered one of his childhood chums..."
And then she had begun to cry.
That night, lacking roughly six months of being twenty-six years since the day in 1957 when George Denbrough had met a certaln Pennywise the Clown, Stanley and Patty Urls had been sitting In the den of their home in a suburb of Atlanta, Georgla. The television was on, and Patty was sitting in front of it, dividing her attention between a plle of sewing and her favorite game show, which happened to be The Joker is Wild. She Ilked It because she knew almost all the answers. She had once asked Stan (who, although he had told her that Willam Denbrough had once been known In the long-dead days of their Maine youth
himself as Stuttering BlII, had neglected all these years to tell her that he,had been known as Stanley Urine) why they gave the contestants such easy questlons, and Stanley had replled: "It's probably much tougher up there under the lights, with those cameras In your face. It's easler to choke when it's for real."
That was probably very true, she had decided. Stanley had really fine insights Into human nature sometimes. Much finer, she considered, than Stanley's old friend Willam Debrough, who had gotten rich by writing a bunch of horrorbooks and appealing to people's baser natures.
Not that the Urlses were doing badly themselves: the suburb was a fine one, and the home which they had purchased for $87,000 in fame would probably sell now quickly and painlessly for around $165,000. She sometimes drove back from the shopping center In her Audi 5000 (Stanley drove a Mercedes diesel), saw her house set back da tastefully behind low yew hedges, and felt a kind of fierce happiness that was so mixed with bitter pride that It made her feel a little sick. Once there had been an elghteen-year-old girl named Patricia Blum who had been refused entry to the after-prom party being held at the country club in the small upstate New York town where she had grown up, refused of course because her last name was Blum, refused of course because she was Jewish, 1965 that had been, long ago, except that for part of her it was never going to be long ago; part of her would always be walking back to the car with Michael, hls father's car which he had borrowed for the evening, Michael in hls white dinner-jacket--how I+ had glimmered In the soft spring night!--and she in a pale green evening gown the color of seawater on a cloudy day...only they had not been walking back, no, not exactly, what they had been doing was slInking back, both of them feeling more sickly Jewish than they had ever felt in their lives, feeling like pawnbrokers, feeling like cattle-car riders, feeling long-nosed, feeling olly, feeling like mockles, like sheenies, Ike klkes; not feeling angry, just feelIng ashamed, the anger came later, the sick, twisting anger: and then someone had laughed. A high, shrill, tittering laugh Ilke a fast run of notes on a piano, and in the car she had wept, and when Michael trled to put a clumsy, comforting hand on the back of her neck she had clawed I+ away, feelIng ashamed, feeling dirty, feeling Jewish.
The house set back so tastefully behind the low yew hedges made that better...but not all better. The hurt and the shame were still there, and not even being accepted In this quiet, sleekly well-to-do nelghborhood could make it gone. Not even being members of the country club, where the maitre d! always greeted them with a quietly respectful "Good evening, Mr. and Mrs. Uris" could make it all gone. She would come home, cradled in her new Audi, and she would look at her white house with its black shutters sitting on its expanse of green lawn behind the low yew hedges, and she would hope that the girl who had tittered was living in a shitty tract house with a husband who beat her, that she had been pregnant three times and miscarrled each one, that her husband cheated on her with diseased women, she had a slipped disc and fallen arches and cysts on her dirty tittering tongue.
She would hate herself for these thoughts, these uncharitable thoughts, and sometimes months would go by without them and she would think, Maybe all of that is past me now, I am woman, a thirty-three year-old woman, that girl who sat in Michael's father's car in her green prom gown and wept her mascara down her cheeks is fifteen years dead, mabe I can forget her and just be myself. And then she would be somewhere--at the supermarket, maybe~-and she would hear sudden tittering laughter like a run of notes in some idiot symphony from the next alsle and her back would prickle, her nipples would go hard and hurtful, chafing against her bra, and she would think helplessly: Someone just told someone else that I'm Jewish, that I'm a mockte and a kike, that Stanley's a mockie and a kike, you know those Jews, they're good with numbers, we let them tnto the country club, we had to do that, back tin << that smart sheente doctor won hts sutt, but we laugh at them, when thetr backs are turned we laugh at them and laugh at them and-- 
Then the hate and the shame would come flooding back !Iike a ghastly migrane headache of the soul and she would dispalr for herself and for the human race.
Werewolves--that was what the book by that man Denbrough which she had tried to read had been about. Werewolves! What did a man like that know about horror? 
But most of the time she felt better than that. She loved her house, she loved her man, and most of the time she was able to love her life and herself. 
It hadn't always been that way; when she had become engaged to Stanley, her parents had shaken their heads in despair. She had met him at a sorority i He had 
With come Friends Weorork Stole University come over,from Giugno erase where he was a scholarship student +iygesame 4rtoese, and by the time that evening was over, she suspected that she loved him. In the winter break, she was sure. And when spring came around and Stanley offered her a small diamond ring, she had accepted it. 
Her parents had accepted it as well, although they had not been happy about it, not at all. There was little they could do but accept, although Stanley Uris was studying advanced eccouating and would shortly be sallying forth into a desperately depressed job-market ga with no family fincances behind him to backstop hIs entry into a dangerous world--an entry he would make, apparantly, with their only daughter as his hostage to fortune. But she was twenty-two, a woman who would soon graduate herself wlth a Bachelor of arts in English, and what could they say? She was a woman. The most the Blums had been able to do was to persuade them to wait until they were both working. And to have Stanley's parents for dinner. 
"I'll be supporting that four-eyed son of a bitch for the rest of my life,"
Patty had heard her father say one night near ese end of the spring vacation. 
The two of them had gone out to dinner, it ae had drunk a little too much. 
"Shh, she'll hear you," Mary Blum said. 
She had lain awake that night until long after midnight, and had spent the next two years learning how not to add a hate of her own father to her other hates.
That one she had won. Stanley had helped her. 
His parents had been equally concerned about the marrlage, had considered it nasty (although they themselves had married in their early twenties, their idea of a marriage that was not hasty apparantly consisted of vows taken by partners on the darker side of forty). Only Stanley had seemed sure of himself, unconcerned, confident © tne future. And his confldence had been justified in every way. In July of that year, 1970, with the ink still drying on her diploma, Patty had landed a job teaching junior high school English in the small town of Traynor, forty miles south of Atlanta. She had tamubena-fumbowapt preliminary applications through teachers' journals, everywhere from Oregon and Idaho to Rhode Island. She had winnowed the list to half a dozen not-very-possibles, and  Stanley had tapped the letter from the Traynor Superintendent of Schools.
"There," he said. 
She looked at him, a little startled by the simple certainty in his voice. "Do you know Georgia?" She asked. 
Stan shook his head. "Grew up in central Maine, moved to Massachusetts when I was sixteen, then came to school here." These were all things she knew, of course. "Never been south of the Mason-Dixon line [in my life." He grinned. 
"Then why--" 
"Because it's right." 
"You can't know that, Stanley." 
"But I do," he had said simply, and she had felt a ripple of unease go up her back at that. 
"How do you know?" 
His smile had faltered a little, and for a moment he had seemed puzzled.
His eyes had darkened, as if he looked inward, consulting some interior device which ticked and whIrred correctly, but which, ultimately, he did not understand. 
"Trust me, babe," he said, and so she had. 
The interview had gone smashingly, and she knew she had the job when she boarded the train back to upstate New York. The head of the department had taken an instant liking to her and Patty to him; she had almost aac tn click. The letter came a week later. The Traynor school department could offer her $9200 and a probationary contract. 
"You'll starve," Herbert Blum said. "And you'll be hot whIle you starve." 
But they had not starved. 
They were married on August 19th, 1970, and Patty Uris had gone to her marrlage bed a virgin, deliciously lustful but a little frightened. When Stan slid into bed beside her, naked, she had whispered, "Don't hurt me." 
"Never," he said, taking her body in his arms, and it was a promise he had kept falthfully until May 27th, 1983, the night of the bath. 
Her teaching went well. Stanley got a job driving a bakery truck for one hundred dollars a week, and in November of that year, when the new shopping center opened at Traynor Flats, he got a job wlth the H&R Block office out there for a hundred and fifty. Their combined income was only $17,000 a year, a king's ransom it seemed in those days when gas sold for thirty cents a gallon and a loaf of bread could be had for thirty-one cents. In March of 1971, with no fuss or fanfare, Patty Uris had thrown away her wheel of birth contro! plils and had walted to see exactly when it would happen. 
In 1973 Stan had quit Block and opened his own business. Al! four of the in-laws agreed it was a foolhardy move. Stanley should of course SS ee business, it was admlrable to be ambitious and understandable to wont to be one's own boss. But it was too early, all of themtagreed, and too much of a burden to put on Patty. The consensus seemed to be that a man should not even think about going into business for himself until! he had reached a more serne and mature age--around ice perhaps. 
Again, Stanley seemed almost preternaturally confident. He had made contacts working for Block, of course; he was young, personable, bright and apt. 
But he could not have known that Corridor Technics was about to settle on a huge patch of farmed-out land less than ten miles from the suburb whIch they had eventually moved to in ane. or that Corridor would be in the market for an independent accounting survey a year after that. Even If he had known, he surely never could I have believed that they would give the job to a young, bespectacled bee Wit ee easy grin, a hIipshot way of walking, and the last ghosts of his adolescent ao yet they had, and it seemed that Stan had known all along that they would. 
His work for Technics had led to an offer of a full-tlme position with the company starting at better than thirty thousand dollars a year. Stanley had turned it down, telling them that he would rather freelance. But the Job had brought him into contact with some of Atlanta's richest and most powerful men, and enough of them liked him so that by the time they moved, he employed sIx people and was himself making over twice what Corridor Technics had offered him in mid-1974. in 1981, their income had broken into the hitherto unsuspected (by Patty, at least) territory of Six Figures. And it had all happened with a casual ease which had sometime frightened her. Only Stan had never seemed to be frightened, and once, when «he had made an uneasy joke about deals with the devil, he had laughed until he almost choked. 
There was a single cloud, and as she had suspected, it was her mother who had first voiced the problem aloud, her mother who had first pointed to the cloud and announced its presence. It came as a question in one of Mary Blum's letters, §She wrote Patty once a weok, and following the night of the bath, she had arrived like a great gore-crow in her flapping black coat; it had taken all of Patty's flagging will and energy not to give in to her mother's assuredly well-meant advice and comfortings. That particular letter had arrived in 1977. It came forwarded from the old Traynor address and Patty read it in a living room filled with cardboard liquor-store boxes from which their possessions, looking somehow forlorn and uprooted and dispossed, spilled. 
In most ways it oon the usual Mary Blum Letter From Home: four closely written pages on blue paper--each sheet headed JUST A NOTE FROM MARY--in her mother's nearly illegible scrawl. Stan had often complained that he could not read a single word his mother-in-law wrote. "Why would you want to?" Patty had responded. 
This one was complete wlth all the usual news of old friends and relatives who were already beginning to fade in Patty's memory like photographs in an old album. Her father was still having too many stomach-aches; he was sure it was only dyspepsla and wouldn't believe it was an ulcer until he started coughing blood. You know your father, dear, he works like a mule, but he also, God forgive her for saying so, thought like one sometimes. Randi Harlengen had gotten her tubes tied, they took cysts out of her ovarles as blg as golf-balls, no malignancy, thank God, only twenty-seven and ovarlan cysts, it was the water in New York city, she was sure of that, the dirty water and the dirty alr, God knew what kind of diseases you could get in the city, and she often thanked God that Patty and Stan were someplace healthy (to Mary Blum all of the south, including Atlanta, was in the country). Her Aunt Margaret was fighting with the power company again, Stella Flanagan had gotten married again, Richie Huber had been fired from yet another job-- 
And in the middle of this chatty (and sometimes catty) outpouring, in the middle of a paragraph, apropos nothing that had gone before or which came after, Mary Blum had casually asked the Dreaded Question: "So when are you and Stan going to make us grandparents? We're all ready to start spolling him (or her) rotten." And then on to Richie Huber's losy job and the Bruckner girl! from down the block who had been sent from schoo! for wearing a skirt so short that the edges of her pantles had been showing under the hem. 
Feeling low and homesick for their place in Traynor, now irretrievably gone, Patty had gone into what was to become their bedroom, lay down on the mattress on the floor (the box spring had not yet been delivered, and the mattress, all by itself, looked like some pecullar artifact cast up on a deserted beach) and wept for nearly twenty minutes. She supposed she would have had that particular cry sooner or later; her mother's letter had brought it on sooner, that was all. 
Stanley wanted children. She wanted children. They were as compatIble on that subject as on their casual life-style, their enjoyment of Woody Allen's films, and their Irregular attendence at the synagogue three miles away. The extra room
In the small house they had rented in Traynor had been hers for sewing on the right, his for reading on the Jeft--but between them was an agreement so solid it barely needed to be spoken: someday the room would belong to the child. But the child had not come. The Singer sewing machine and the wicker baskets of fabric and patterns had never been replaced with a crib, and in the bathroom, in the cabinet under the kitchen sink, her boxes of Sta-Free sanitary pads kept their place. The cardinal visited monthly; she was depressingly regular. 
In 1974, three years after she had thrown away the last cycle of bIrthcontrol pllls, they saw a doctor named Harkavay in Atlanta. "We want to know if there's something wrong," Stanley said, "and if there Is, we want to know if it can be fixed." 
So they took the tests, which showed that Stan's sperm was allve and well, that Patty's eggs were fertile, and that all the channels that were Supposed to be open were, Nothing was wrong. Only everything. 
Harkavay, who wore no wedding ring, and who had the open, pleasant, ruddy face of a college graduate student Just back from a midterm skling vacation in
Colorado, told them that their problem was by no means unique. He told them that there seemed to be some sort of psychological correlatlve in such cases. It was, he said, apparantly possible to simply want a child too much, They would have to relax, They ought, if they could, to try and forget all about procreation when they had sex,  Stan was grumpy on the way home, Patty asked him why. 
"I never think of procreation during," he said. 
"You didn't believe him," she said, trying not to giggle. 
"I've discovered a great truth about myself today," he said. "It's apparantly impossible for me to believe in a doctor who looks like a graduate student and wears Dingo boots." 
Then she did glggle, even though she was feeling a bit lonesome and a bit frightened. And that night, in bed, long after she believed that Stan must be asleep, he had frightened her by speaking in the dark: speaking in a voice that was flat but nevertheless choked with tears. "It's me," he said. "It's my fault." 
She rolled toward him, groped for him, held him. 
"Stanley, don't be stupid," she said. But her heart was beating fast-- much too fast. It wasn't just that he had Startled her; it was as if he had looked into her mind ahd read a secret conviction that she held there. with no rhyme, no reason, she felt--she knew--that there was something wrong...and it wasn't her.
It was, as he had said, him. Something in him.
"Don't be such a klutz," she whispered flercely agaltnst his shoulder. He was sweating lightly, and she Suddenly became aware that he was afrald, the fear was coming off him in cold waves; lying naked with him was suddenly like being naked in front of an open refrigerator. 
"I'm not being stupid," he said in that same flat, teary voice, "and you know it. It's me. But I don't know why." 
"You can't know any such thing." Her voice was harsh, scolding--her mother's voice when her mother was afrald. And even as she scolded him, a shudder ran through her body, twisting like a whip. Stanley's arms tightened around her. 
He had felt it. 
"I know it, and so do you," he said again. Hoe fell silent for a moment and then said: "Sometimes I think I know why. Sometimes I have a dream, a bad dream, and I wake up and I think, 'I know now. I know what's wrong.' But then it just fades. The way dreams do." 
She knew he dreamed uneasilly sometimes. On half a dozen occasions he had awakened her, thrashing and moaning. On other occaslons she had perhaps slept through his dark interludes. Whenever she asked him, he said the same thing: I can't remember. And then he would reach for his clgarettes and smoke sitting up
In bed, waiting for the dream to pass through his pores and join the swirling currents of smoke, sucked out into the night by the fan in the window. It'll pass, he had toid her once or twice, after particularly bad ones. They always pass, hon. 
Their childlessness had not passed, and on the night of May 27th, 1983, the night of the bath, they were stil! childless. The Sta-Free minis and maxis still occupied their accustomed places on the shelf under the bathroom sink; the cardinal still paid its monthly visit. Her mother had stopped asking in her letters and when Stan and Patty made their twice-yearly visits. There were no more humorous remarks about whether they were taking their vitamin E. Perhaps she had seen the pain in her daughter's eyes, or perhaps she had read It between the lines of Patty's bright, brief notes. Stanley had never mentioned it again either, but sometimes, when he didn't know she was looking, she saw a shadow on his face. Some shadow. 
As if he were trying to remember something--like a bad dream upon waking. 
Other than that--that one cloud--their lives were pleasant enough until the night of May 27th, when the phone rang in the middle of The Joker Is Wild.
Patty had six of Stan's shirts, two of her blouses, her sewing kit, and her odd-button box; Stan had the novel by William Denbrough in his hands. It showed a snarling beast on the front and a balding man who was wearing thick glasses on the back. 
The phone rang. 
Stan, who was sitting next to it, picked it up and said as he always did: "Hello, Uris residence." 
He listened, and a frown line delved its way between his eyebrows. "Who did you say?" 
Patty felt an instant of fright. Later, shame would cause her to lie and tell her parents that she had known something was wrong from the instant the telephone had rung, when in reality there had only been that one instant, that one quick look upward from her sewing. But maybe that was all right. Maybe long before that phone call they had both suspected that something was coming, something that didn't fit with the nice house itseach behind the yew hedges. 
Is it Mom? She mouthed at him in that instant of fright, thinking that perhaps her father, twenty pounds overwelght and prone to what he always called "the bellyache," had had a heart attack. 
Stan shook his head at her, and then smiled a bit at something the voice on the phone was saying. "You...well, I'll be goddamned! Mike! How did--" 
He fell silent again, the smile fading, listening. She recognized--or thought she recognized--his analytic expression, the one that said someone was unfolding a problem or explaining a sudden change in some ongoing situation. It was a client, then. She turned her attention back to the TV, where a woman from Omaha was entering the Bonus Round. As she began searching for a black button to match the ones on Stan's blue denim shirt, Patty was vaguely aware that Stan had settled down to an occaslonal grunt and an "Are you sure?" besIde her. Finally he said, "All right, Mike. I think I understand everything. I...no, I can't promise that, but I'll think it over. You know that...what? Of course I do. Yes...sure...thank you...yes. Yes. Goodbye." He hung up. 
She looked over and saw him staring blankly into the space over the TV  set. On her show, the audience was applauding the woman, who had just won a Chevrolet Caprice. In her living room, Stanley was wearing what she thought of es  +rhs--Protten expression. His face had seemed a little off-color, but she had dismissed that as the table-lamp, with its green glass shade. 
"Who was that, Stan?" 
"Hmmm?" He looked around at her, abstracted. Or so she had thought. It was only later, replaying it again and again, that she came to believe that it was the expression of a man who was unplugging from reality, doing it methodically, one cord at a time. The face of a man who was heading out of the blue and into the black. 
"Who, on the phone?" 
"No one," he said, and stood up. "I think I'll take a bath." 
"At seven o'clock?" 
He didn't answer; only left the room. She might have said something, might have asked if something was wrong, but the next contestant was being introduced and Patty was having a devi! of a time finding a black button to go on Stan's blue shirt. Last month the button box had seemed to contain nothing but. 