Chapter 1
On a very hot day in August of 1994, the pharmacist at the Derry Rite Aid called my wife, Johanna, and told her that her sinus medicine was ready. It's stuff you can buy over the counter these days, I believe. Maybe the fundamental things do apply as time goes by, but the little things change a lot, I have noticed. 
I had finished my writing for the day and offered to pick it up for her. She said thanks, but she wanted to get a piece of fish at the supermarket for supper anyway, and she could do it on her way home. She blew a kiss at me off the palm of her hand and went out. The next time I saw her, she was on TV. That's how you identify the dead here in Derry--no walking down é subterranean corridor with green tiles underfoot and long fluorescent bars overhead, no naked body rolling out of a chilly locker on casters; you just go into an office marked PRIVATE and look at a TV screen and say yep or nope. Same principal, I suppose--the fundamental things apply. 
The Rite Aid is less than a mile eke our house, in a little neighborhood shopping center which also supports a video store, a used bookstore named Spread It Around (they do a very brisk business in my old paperbacks, I'm told), a Radio Shack, and a Fast Foto. It's on Up-Mile Hill, at the intersection of Witcham and Jackson, a busy location that has seen its share of car accidents over the years. Johanna was always a safe driver, though; unless she hid a speeding ticket or two from me (I hid one or two from her, if you must know), she never had so much as a single run-in with the law in her thirty-six years of life, let alone an accident. 
She parked in front of Blockbuster Video, went into the drugstore, and did business with Mr. Joe Wyzer, who was the druggist in those days; he has since moved on. To the Rite Aid in Bangor, I believe someone told me. The prescription was twelve dollars and eighteen cents. She bought something else which is just identified as "sundry" on the cash register slip, an item which cost forty-nine cents. When I was finally able to inventory her purse— when I could bring myself to do it is what I mean, of poursems oo found a foil-wrapped chocolate mouse in amongst the Kleenex, half-finished rolls of Certs, and the jumble of makeup. If such an item isn't a sundry, then I don't know what is. It was the last thing my wife ever bought in this world: a chocolate mouse with marshmallow inside it. 1 unwrapped it and ate it myself, sitting at the kitchen table with the contents of her purse spread out in front of me, and it was like taking communion. When it was gone except for the taste of chocolate on my tongue and in my throat I burst into tears. I sat there and cried for almost half an hour. 
Johanna left the register, walked out into the bright, hammering sun again, swapping her regular glasses for her prescription sunglasses as she did, and just as she stepped from beneath the drug store's slight overhang (I am imagining a little here, I suppose, crossing over into the country of the novelist a little, but not by much; only by inches, and you can trust me on that), there was that shrewish howl of locked tires on pavement that means there's either going to be an accident or a very close call. 
This time the accident happened-—the sort of accident which happened at that stupid Nnened intersection at least once a week, it seemed. A 1989 Toyota was pulling out of the shopping center parking lot and turning left onto Jackson Street. Behind the wheel was Mrs. Esther Easterling, a widow from Barrett's Orchards. She was accompanied by her friend, Mrs. Irene Deorsey, also of Barret's Orchards, who had shopped the video store without finding anything she wanted to rent. "So much violence," she told her friend Esther, who agreed. Esther Easterling was seventy-three years old, Irene Deorsey seventy-one. Both were cigarette widows. 
Esther could hardly have missed the orange Public Works dumptruck coming down the hill; although she denied this to the police, to the newspaper, and to me when I talked to her some two months later, I think it likely that she just forgot to look. I have never held this against her. As my own mother (another cigarette widow, now that I think of it; the woods are full of them) used to say, "The two most common ailments of the elderly are arthritis and stupidity. They can be held responsible for neither." 
Driving the Public Works truck was an Mr. Fraker was thirty-eight years old on the day of my wife's death, driving with his shirt off, smoking a cigarette, and thinking how badly he wanted a cool shower and a cold beer, not necessarily in that order. He and three other men had spent the day putting down asphalt patch out on the Harris Avenue Extension near the airport, a hot job on a hot day, and Bill Fraker guessed he had probably lost three pounds at least to plain old dehydration. He was on his way back to the town garage with the truck, which was empty. Had it still been full of asphalt and a thousand pounds heavier, I think Esther and Irene would very likely have joined their husbands in the afterworld. 
Bill Fraker was going a little too fast, he admitted that— perhaps forty in a thirty mile an hour zone. He was anxious to get back to the garage, sign off on the truck, and get behind the wheel of his own F-150, which had air conditioning. Also, the dump truck's brakes, while good enough to pass inspection, were a long way from tip-top condition. Fraker hit them as soon as he saw the blue Toyota pull out in front of him (he hit his horn, as well), but it was too late. He heard screaming tires--his own, and Esther's as she belatedly realized her danger--and saw her face for just a moment. 
"That was the worst part, somehow," he told me as we sat on his porch, drinking beers--it was October by then, and although the sun was warm on our faces, we were both wearing sweaters. "You know how high up you sit in one of those dump-trucks?" 
I nodded. 
"Well, she was looking up to see me—craning up, you'd say-- and the sun was full in her face. I could see how old she was. I remember thinking, 'Holy shit, she's gonna break like glass if I can't stop.' But old people are tough, more often than not. They can surprise you. I mean, look at how it turned out, both those old biddies still alive, and your wife..." 
He stopped then, bright red color dashing into his cheeks, making him look like a boy who has been laughed at in the schoolyard by girls who have noticed his fly is unzipped. It was comical, but if I'd smiled, it only would have confused him. 
"Mr. Noonan, I'm sorry. My mouth just sort of ran away with me." 
"It's all right," I told him. "I'm over the worst of it, anyway."
That was a lie, of course, but it put us back on track. 
"Anyway," he said, "we hit. There was a loud bang, and a crumping sound when the driver's side of the car caved in.
Breaking glass, too. 1 was thrown against the wheel hard enough so
I couldn't draw a breath without it hurting for a week or more, and
I had a big circular bruise right here." He drew an arc on his chest just below the collarbones. "y banged my head on the windshield hard enough to crack the glass, but all I got up there was a little purple knob...no bleeding, not even a headache. My wife says I've just got a naturally thick skull. I saw the woman driving the
Toyota, Mrs. Easterling, thrown across the console between the front bucket seats. Then we were finally stopped, all tangled together in the middle of the street, and I got out to see how bad they were. I tell you, I expected to find them both dead." 
Neither of them were dead, neither of them were even unconscious, although Mrs. Easterling had three broken ribs and a dislocated hip. Mrs. Deorsey, who had been a seat away from the impact, suffered a concussion when she rapped her head on her window. That was all; she was "treated and released at Home Hospital," as the Derry News always puts it in such cases. 
My wife, the former Johanna Arlen of Kittery, saw it all from where she stood outside the drug store, with her purse slung over her shoulder and her prescription bag in one hand. Like Bill Fraker, she thought the occupants of the Toyota must either be dead or seriously hurt. The sound of the collison had been a hollow, authoritative bang which rolled through the hot afternoon air like a bowling ball down an alley. The sound of breaking glass surrounded it like jagged lace. The two vehicles were tangled violently together in the middle of Jackson Street, the dirty orange truck looming over the pale blue import like a bullying parent over a cowering child. 
Johanna began to sprint across the parking lot toward the street. Others were doing the same all around her. One of them, Miss Jill Dunbarry, had been window-shopping at Radio Shack when the accident occurred. She said she thought she remembered running past Johanna--she was pretty sure she remembered someone in blue slacks, at feasteour she couldn't be sure. By then, Mrs. Easterling was screaming that she was hurt, they were both hurt, wouldn't somebody help her and her friend Irene. 
Halfway across the parking lot, near a little cluster of newspaper dispensers, my wife fell down. Her purse-strap stayed over her shoulder, but her prescription bag slipped from her hand, and the plastic bottle inside shattered. The top of the bag was rolled down, though, and all the pills stayed in it. I could have used them myself, if I'd ever had sinus problems. 
No one noticed the lady lying in the parking lot by the newspaper dispensers; they were focused on the tangled vehicles, the screaming women, the spreading puddle of water and antifreeze from the public works truck's ruptured radiator. ("That's gas!" the clerk from Fast Foto shouted to anyone who would listen.
"That's gas, watch out she don't blow, fellas!") One or two of the would-be rescuers might have jumped right over her, perhaps thinking she had fainted. To think such a thing on a day when the temperature was pushing ninety-five degrees would not have been unreasonable. 
Roughly two dozen people from the shopping center clustered around the accident; another four dozen or so came running over from Strawford Park, where a baseball game had been going on. I imagine that all the things you would expect to hear in such situations were said, many of them more than once.
Bill Fraker was trying to get to the crumpled Toyota; he would have been saying Are they all right? Are they all right? Somebody (perhaps several somebodies) would have laid kindly hands on him and tried to lead him away. You better sit down, mister, is what these folks would have found in their scripts, along with You don't look so good, of course. Someone would have said You better not move to Esther Easterling and/or Irene Deorsey; someone else would have advised Just sit still. The fellow (or gal) with the Bee belief in the Power of Positive Thinking would be saying You're all right, you're all right in tones of gruff reassurance, and several someones would be yelling Somebody call an ambulance! 
Milling around. Someone reaching through the misshap: hole which had been the driver's side window to pat Esther's gnarled, trembling old hand. People immediately giving way for Joe Wyzer; at such moments anyone in a white coat automatically becomes the belle of the ball. In the distance, the warble of an ambulance siren rising like shaky air over an incinerator, and once more the Greek chorus saying what the Greek chorus always says in such situations: Thank God and Here it comes and I can hear it and
Finally. 
All during this, lying unnoticed in the parking lot, was my wife with her purse still over her shoulder (inside, still wrapped in foil, her uneaten "sundry") and her white paper prescription bag near one outstretched hand. It was Joe Wyzer, hurrying back to the pharmacy to get a compress for Irene Deorsey's head, who spotted her. He recognized her even lying face-down. He recognized her by her red hair, white blouse, and blue slacks. He recognized her becatise he had waited on her not fifteen minutes before. 
"Mrs. Noonan?" he asked, forgetting all about the compress  fot the dazed but apparently not too badly hurt Irene Deorsey.
"Mrs. Noonan, are you all right?" Knowing already (or so I suspect; perhaps I am wrong) that she was not. 
He turned her over. It took both hands to do it, and even then he had to work hard, kneeling and pushing and lifting there in the parking lot with the heat baking down from above and then bouncing back up from the asphalt. Dead people put on weight, it seems to me; both in their flesh and in our minds, they put on weight. 
Her face was burned. When I identfied her, I could see the scorches on her forehead and chin even on the video monitor. I started to ask the assistant medical examiner what they were, but then I knew...just as I knew I might vomit before much longer.
Mid-August, hot pavement, elementary, my dear Watson. The marks on her forehead and chin were no different than the ones you see on a steak when you take it off the grille. During the five minutes or so she had lain unnoticed on the pavement, she had not just been dying; she had been cooking. 
Wyzer got up, saw that the ambulance had arrived, and ran toward it. He pushed his way through the crowd and grabbed one of the attendants as he got out om behind the wheel. "There woman over there," Wyzer xe pointing toward the parking lot. 
"Guy, we've got two women right here, and a man as wel ve the attendant said. He tried to pull away, but Wyzer held on. 
"Never mind them right now," he said. "They're basically okay. The woman over there isn't." 
The woman over there was almost certainly dead, and I'm pretty sure Joe Wyzer knew it even then...but he had his priorities straight. Give him that. And he was convincing enough to get both paramedics moving away from the tangle of truck and Toyota, in spite of Esther Easterling's cries of pain and the rumbles of protest from the Greek chorus. 
When they got to my wife, one of the paramedics was quick to confirm what Joe Wyzer had already suspected. "Holy shit," the other one said. "What happened to her?" 
"Feart, most likely," the first one said. "She got excited and it just blew out on her. Happens all the time." 
But it wasn't her heart. The autopsy revealed a brain anyurism which she might have been living with, all unknown, for examiner told me, but it had still come swiftly enough...and she wouldn't have suffered. Just one big black nova, all sensation and thought gone even before she hit the pavement. 
The autopsy revealed something else, as well, something which I believe was then revealed to me by oversight...certainly there was no need for me to know, at least in their view. At the time of her death in the Rite Aid parking lot, Jo had been six weeks pregnant. 
The days leading up to the funeral and the funeral itself are dreamlike in my memory—the clearest memory I have is of eating Jo's chocolate "sundry" and crying...crying mostly, I think, because I knew how soon the taste of it would be gone. I had one other crying fit a few days after we buried her, and I will tell you about that one shortly. 
"I can't believe you did that," I said later, as we sat in a booth at Jack's Pub, drinking beers. 
"He was trying to stick it to you, Mikey," he said. "I hate guys like that." He reached into his back pocket, brought out a handkerchief, and wiped absently at his cheeks with it. He hadn't broken down—none of the Arlens broke down, at least not where I could see them do it-but Frank had leaked steadily all day; he looked ke a man suffering from severe conjunctivitis. 
There had been six Arlen sibs in all, Jo the youngest and the only girl. She had been the pet of her big brothers. I suspect that if I'd had anything to do with her death, the five of them would have torn me apart with their bare hands. As it was, they formed a protective shield around me instead, and that was good. 
Wonderful, in fact. I suppose I would have muddled through
"If a guy gets caught taking your stereo out of your car, north from Massachusetts in the sixties, and I could still hear Malden in Frank's voice--caught was coowat, car was cah, call was caul. "If the same guy is trying to sell a grieving husband a three thousand dollar casket for forty-five hundred dollars, they call it business and ask him to speak at the Rotary Club luncheon. Greedy asshole, I fed him his lunch, didn't I?"
"Yes. You did."
"You okay, Mikey?"
"I'm okay."
"Sincerely okay?"
"Tow the fuck should I know?" I asked him, loud enough to turn some heads in a nearby booth.
"Call it theft and put him in jail," Frank said. The Arlens had cone ee . offered a prayer for t Breedlove, the boy who cut ae passin the fate: and raked our yard in the fall, brought everyone to co by singing "Blessed Assurance," which Frank said had been Jo's favorite hymn as a girl.
How Frank found Pete and persuaded him to sing at the funeral is something I never found out. 
We got through it-the afternoon and evening viewings on Tuesday (although why people want to come to a funeral chapel and stare at a closed coffin while their noses and throats fill with the Hoying aroma of too many flowers is beyond me), the funeral service on Wednesday morning, then the little pray-over at Fairlawn Cemetery. What I remember mostly was thinking how hot it was, how lost I felt without having Jo to talk to, and that I wished I had bought a new pair of shoes. Jo would have pestered me to death about the ones I was wearing if she'd seen them. for a nursing Home Aten ard Sid acviee? 
He advised something, I know he did, but I'll be canes if I know what it was. I agreed to it, I remember that, but not what it was. Later that day, Siddy, our Mom, and our aunt climbed nate into Siddy's rental car for the drive to Boston, where they would spend the night and then grab the Southern Crescent the following day. My brother is happy enough to chaperone the old folks, but he doesn't fly, even if the tickets are on me. He claims there are no breakdown lanes in the sky, if the engine quits. 
Most of the Arlens left the next day. Once more it was dog-hot, the sun glaring out of a white-haze sky and lying on everything like melted brass. They stood in front 4 our house—which had become solely my house by then—with three taxis lined up at the curb, hugging one another amid the litter of tote-bags and saying their goodbyes in those foggy Massachusetts accents. 
coffee cans I four in the eel setae, We went ont to F 1: vn. and put them on the new grave. Then we just sat there for awhile under the beating sun. 
"She was always just the sweetest thing in my life," Frank said at last in a strange, muffled voice. "We took care of Jo when we were kids. Us guys. No one messed with Jo, I'll tell you.
Anyone tried, we'd feed em their lunc MY 
"She told me a lot of stories."
"Good ones?"
"Yeah, real good."
"I'm going to miss her so much."
"Me, too," I said. "Me too."
"Was it a boy or a girl?" he asked. "The chap she was carrying?" 
Frank, divorced six years and on his own, hi me. On our way back to the house he said, "I worry about you,
Mikey. You haven't got much family to fall back on in a time like this, and what you do have is far away."
"I'll be all right," I said. 
He nodded. "That's what we say, anyway, isn't it?" 
"We?" 
"Guys. 'I'll be all right.' And if we're not, we try to make sure no onelncns it." He looked at me, eyes still leaking, handkerchief in one big sunburned hand. "If you're not all right, Mikey, and you don't want to call your brother, let me be your brother For Jo's sake if not your own." 
"Okay," I said, respecting and appreciating the offer, also knowing I would do no such thing. I don't call people for help. It's  not because of the way I was raised, at least I don't think so; it's take them. I feel pain like Hee Tmeed tol touch andibe touched. But if someone asks me, "Are you all right?" I can't answer no. I can't say help me. 
A couple of hours later, Frank left for the southern end of the state. When he opened the car door, I was touched to see that the taped book he was listening to was one of mine. He hugged me, then surprised me with a kiss on the mouth, a good hard smack. "If you need to talk, call," he said. "And if you need to be with someone, Mikey, don't bother to call. Just come." 
I nodded. 
"And be careful." 
That startled me. The combination of heat and grief had made me feel as if I had been living in a dream for the last few days, but that got through. 
"Careful?" I asked him. "Careful of what?"
August, all orange and somehow squashed, a if an invisible hana was pushing down on the top of it and at any moment it might just pop like a mosquito and splatter all over the horizon? It was like that. In the east, where it was already dark, thunder was rumbling.
But there was no rain that night, only a dark that came down as thick and stifling as a blanket. All the same, I slipped in front of the word processor and wrote for an hour or so. It went pretty well, as 
I remember. And you know, even when it doesn't, it passes the time. 
My Peron crying fit came three or four days after the funeral. That sense of being in a dream persisted—I walked, I talked, I answered the phone, I worked on my new book, which had been about eighty per cent complete when Jo died--but all the time there was this clear sense of disconnected cluelessness, a feeling that iealdne like her io Senge couple of her friends over o following week and give the big old Fawarlin pile where I now lived alone-rolling around in it like the last pea in a restaurant- sized can —a good stem to stern cleaning. They would do it, she said, for ninety dollars split among the three of them, and mostly because it wasn't good for me to go on without having it done.
There had to be a scrubbing after a death, she said, even if the death didn't happen in the house itself. 
I told her it was a fine idea, but I would pay her and the women she brought a hundred and twenty for six hours' work. At the end of the six hours, I wanted the job done. And if it wasn't, I told her, it would be done, anyway. 
"Mr. Noonan, that's far too much," she said. 
"Maybe and maybe not, but it's what I'm paying," I said.
"Will you do it?" 
She said she would, of course she would. 
ions, perhaps ("We are often overcome os the sofa, Michael," she said to me once, "have you noticed?"), or beer cans under the sofa on the sunporch, maybe even an unflushed toilet. In truth, I can't tell you any one thing I was looking for; that sense of being in the zone, still held firm control over my mind. The clearest thoughts I had during those days were either about the end of the novel I was writing (the psychotic killer had lured my heroine to a high-rise building and meant to push her off) or about the fact that
Jo had been pregnant. Had she known? Had she at least been sick on enough mornings to suspect? And if so, why hadnt she said anything? 
That latter was the train of thought I was riding when I knelt down, looked under our bed and saw an open paperback on Jo's side. She hadn't been dead long, but few household lands are so 
I pushed the thought awarl te ded to go, but I sensed it was still close—just down the street and Beeting around the corner.
Meantime, there was this book. 
Johanna and I had been English majors at the University of Maine, and like many others of our ilk, I suppose, we fell in love to the sound of Shakespeare and the Tilbury Town cynicism of Edward Arlington Robinson. Yet the writer which had bound us closest together was no college-friendly poet or essayist but W. Somerset Maughm, that elderly, globetrotting novelist-playwright with the reptile's face (always obscured by cigarette smoke in his photoeranhe it seems) and the romantic's heart. So it did not surprise me much to find that the story Jo had been reading at the time of her death in a shopping center parking lot was The Moon and Sixpence. Probaby not just reading but rereading, although I couldn't recall ever seeing her with this one before. I had myself she had said when I was first getting to know her. In Twentieth Century British Lit, this had been, probably in 1980. Johanna Arlen had been a fiery little sophomore. I was a senior, picking up the Twentieth Century Brits simply because I had time on my hands that last semester. "A hundred years from now," she had said, "the shame of the mid-twentieth century literary critics will be that they embraced Lawrence and ignored Maughm." This was greeted with contemptuously good-natured laughter (they all knew Women in Love was one of the greatest damn books ever written), but I didn't laugh. I fell in love. 
The playing card marked pages 102 and 103 Dirk Stroeve has just discovered that his wife has left him for Strickland, Maughm's version of Paul Gaugan...although it was always t Allace Stevens that Strickland really reminded me of. The
"Easy for you to say, hom now belonged just to me. I turned ee page ng read this: 
Strickland's frig calm robbed grome of his self-control. Blind rage seized him, and without knowing what he was doing he flung himself on Strickland. Strickland was taken by surprise and he staggered, but he was very strong, even after his illness, and in a moment, he did not exactly know how, Stroeve found himself on the floor. 
'You funny little man,' said Strickland. 
It occurred to me that Jo was never going to turn the page and hear Strickland call the pathetic Stroeve a funny little man. Ina moment of brilliant epiphany I have never forgotten—how could I? it Aas one of the clearest moments of my life—-I understood it wasn't a mistake that would be rectified, or a dream from which I would awaken. Johanna was dead. 
All strength ran out of me. If the bed hadn't been there, I would have fallen to the floor. We weep from our eyes, it's all we service with its ashes to ashes and dust to dust, I hadn't really believed it. The Penguin paperback did what the thirty-five-hundred dollar grey coffin had not: it first insisted she was dead and then swallowed her whole. 
You funny little man, said Strickland. 
I lay back on our bed, crossed my forearms over my face, and wept. I cried myself to sleep, as children do when they're unhappy, bl in that sleep I had an awful dream. I dreamed that I woke up, saw the paperback edition of The Moon and Sixpence still lying on the coverlet beside me, and decided to put it back under the bed where 
I had found it. God knows why. You know how confused dreams 
Assurance" in his sweet tenor's voice, in spite of the graveside
Strickland or and forever--and rolled over on my side, meaning to put the book back exactly where I had found it. , 
Jo was lying under the bed amid the dust-kitties. A strand of cobweb hung down reer the bottom of the box spring and caressed her cheek like a feather. Her red hair looked dull, but her eyes were dark and alert and baleful in her white face. And when she spoke, I knew that death had driven her insane. 
"Give me that," she hissed. "It's my dust-catcher." 
She snatched The Moon and Sixpence out of my hand before I could offer it to her. For a moment our fingers touched, and hers were as cold as twigs after a frost. She opened the book to her place, the playing card fluttering out, and placed Somerset Maughm over her face—a shroud of words. As she crossed her hands on her bosom and lay still, I realized she was wearing the blue dress I had me off the side of the bed. I had tears were still damp on my cheeks, and my eyelids eel cheney ee stretched feel they get after a bout of weeping. The vision of her rr that blue dress was vivid enough upon awaking that I had to roll on my side, hang my head down, and peer under the bed. For a moment I was sure she would be there as I had dreamed her, with the book over her face, that she would reach out with her waxy fingers and share her insanity like a bad cold. 
There was nothing there, of course—dreams are just dreams.
And I nad no intention of putting the book back where I had found it; Denise Breedlove or one of her friends would only find it, pull it out, and toss it in a box marked YARD SALE. 
And although the dream's logic and terrifying clarity were beginning to fade, some of it must have remained, because that night I slept on the couch in my study. It was the right choice, I guess, because there were no more dreams. That I remember, at least; the nothingness of good sleep.